hey everyone and welcome back to the
channel today we've got another problem
breakdown for you we're going to be
doing design WhatsApp or design
messenger this is a really common
question and one that people are
constantly asking us uh for a YouTube
video so here I am before the end of the
year giving you uh that YouTube video uh
for you those of you who are new to the
channel we are hello interview we're
here to help you prepare for your
software engineering interviews this
channel is loaded with guides deep Dives
uh and problem breakdowns that will
hopefully help you prepare for system
design we also have a ton of content on
the site talking about behavioral
interviews we've got animated coding
Solutions and patterns uh lots of stuff
that we think will be very helpful for
you um for me I'm Stefan I am one of the
co-founders of hello interview I have
also worked as a senior manager at meta
and then at Amazon uh where I conducted
north of 20 interviews so I am very
familiar with the process and hoping to
share some insights as we walk through
but I don't want to spend too much time
if you like content like this please
like the video subscribe and let's go
ahead and dive
in before we dive in I wanted to
introduce our delivery framework this is
just basically a series of steps that
you'll follow in order to conduct your
system design interview now for midlevel
and Senior candidates I highly recommend
that you follow this as closely as you
can if you're a staff level candidate
you've got 20 years of experience and
you want to color outside the line great
but the purpose of the delivery
framework is to make sure that you cover
the important bits of the design and
also to help you to think about the
problem as you work through it what we
find is that candidates who follow this
framework tend to on average and there's
certainly exceptions uh perform better
uh in interviews than than candidates
who don't now I'm going to actually try
to follow this as closely as possible
for this video so you can get an idea of
what that looks like and then I'll
earmark those places where I'm diverging
or giving you some additional detail
that may not actually be part of your
interview but the first step is
requirements and that's where we're
going
next is a place where we can have a
conversation with our interviewer to
really understand the scope of the
question and sometimes we can even
debate what's in and out of scope in the
ideal case once we've set our functional
requirements we can actually use those
as stepping stones for our high level
design and for a lot of candidates who
get lost or have difficulty managing
their time it usually comes back to them
not setting good and actionable
requirements so do spend time here we
generally recommend candidates spend
about five minutes and what that gives
you enough time to do is to think
through all of the different product
edge cases to come up with a concise set
of functionalities that you need as well
as the non-functional or constraints on
your system so for WhatsApp the easiest
way for me to come up with functional
requirements is to put my myself in the
shoes of the end user so I open up the
WhatsApp app what do I see well the
first thing that I see is a list of all
the chats that I have with other people
or other groups but in order for those
chats to exist I have to have created
them so let's go ahead and assume that
one of my functional requirements is to
start group chats I'm going to use group
here as like a general case if I've got
a group of two that's a one one to one
message now once I've got those those
chats in place the next natural
requirement is for me to send and
receive messages between different users
um my expectation is that if I send a
message it goes to all of the members of
that chat and if anybody sends a message
to a chat that I'm a member of I'm going
to receive that now it's a natural
question here to ask are there
constraints on these messages do we want
to support video audio and maybe my
inter viewer says yeah we should
definitely do that so we add media
attachments to what we're going to
design another thing that we should
probably think through as the candidate
is what happens when our clients go
offline if you're designing um a product
that has a mobile app those mobile apps
are going to disconnect periodically
maybe I turn off my phone before I go to
bed and in that case for WhatsApp I
would expect that when I wake up and
turn my phone on on that I'm actually
going to get all the messages that I
received when I was offline so I'd like
to be able to access the messages after
I've been
offline I can go into additional detail
here I can ask my interviewer about
whether we should support video and
audio calling whether I need to be able
to see whether my friends are online or
offline but generally speaking we should
try to keep our requirements pretty
short and there's no
actual need for me to go ahead and say I
need below the line uh audio video
calling if I don't have time now in this
case I've spent about 2 minutes getting
the base functional requirements I have
some additional time here where I can
discuss with my interviewer some
additional functionality they might be
planning but be careful about expanding
the scope to be too uh extensive if you
do you're going to create problems for
yourself if you're low on time and you
didn't just rattle off those
requirements I've obviously thought
about this problem before then don't
bother wasting your time trying to
enumerate things that you're not going
to include it's a good idea to ask your
interviewer hey do you have anything
else that's in mind then move on next
I'm going to move over to my
non-functional requirements and here I'm
going to try to describe how the system
performs these aren't nuser
functionalities these are things that my
system ought to do while while I'm
making those functional requirements
real so the first thing that most people
are going to think of when they think of
a chat app is low latency I'd like to be
able to get my
messages um in a short amount of time
now a lot of candidates will stop here
and they'll say oh it should be low
latency but I would actually encourage
you to quantify these non-functional
requirements where possible in this case
let's think what would be an appropriate
latency for a chat application well it
turns out that most people aren't going
to have two phones sitting in front of
them looking to see if I send it from
this one how quickly do I receive it so
we've got to figure out what would be
perceivable well if you were sitting
across from me and I sent a message and
it I had to wait a few beats before I
got a message that would seem slow but
the difference between 100 milliseconds
and 500 milliseconds is not really all
that noticable so we want to give
ourselves a bit of room here in our
design and we don't need to necessarily
make this uh low latency so let's go
ahead and assume that it's 500
milliseconds of latency this is going to
come back later on in our design because
we'll be able to use that 500
milliseconds and ask whether we have
budget to do different things the next
thing that we might think through is
that we want to make sure these messages
actually get to their recipient uh it
would be weird if I sent a message and
they were like well I never actually got
that so we'd like to be able to guarant
that the delivery of messages actually
happens the next thing that we're going
to think through is what's the scale of
this system and often times candidates
will try to make assumptions here about
the size of the system for most of the
web scale systems it's usually a decent
assumption to assume 100 million or a
billion users and in whatsapp's case I
think it's actually a couple uh billion
users so let's just go ahead say
billions of users so we need high
throughput for our system we're going to
have to handle lots of messages I'm
going to defer here in trying to come up
with the actual number of messages that
the system needs to uh receive and send
because I'll be able to make more
informed estimates of that later on when
I know more about my system I don't need
to jump into uh back of the envelope
calculations just yet the next thing is
specific to what's out I don't want to
store messages unnecessarily so ideally
I'd like to keep the messages on the
server just long enough to be able to
perform my functional requirements and
then I'd like to get rid of them if you
think about privacy and WhatsApp is a
very private app then data is like toxic
sludge it's something that you don't
want to keep around that ideally you're
either actually deleting it or you're
encrypting it in a way that even you
can't access it so that way you don't
have the liability on your hands the
last thing that an app like what app
probably needs is to be able to tolerate
faults this is a gigantic system we're
going to have things that are failing
all the time ideally these individual
components aren't going to take down our
app this is generally true of most apps
but it's especially true of what's out
and so we're going to include this in
our non-functional
requirements now we might talk about
additional things here like should we be
able to prevent spam and security issues
should we have to deal with scraping or
people trying to get contact information
from all WhatsApp users I'm not going to
go into those but if I had additional
time I'd Mark those below the line uh
and move
on now that we've got our functional
requirements our next stop in the
delivery framework is our core entities
core entities are not an explicitly
evaluated part of the interview you're
not going to have interviewers who are
writing in their notes hey they got the
core entities wrong generally speaking
what they're evaluating is that final
design and kind of the process through
which you came up with it but core
entities are really important in that
it's easy to make mistakes in your
design if you don't get the entities
right this is also a place where you can
have some discussion with the
interviewer about the identities of
various items especially in product
style interviews being able to think
deeply about the identities of entities
in your system is going to make a world
of difference in in your data model in
your API and so forth and so for some
interviews like meta's product
architecture interview being able to
reason about these entities is really
important now for this problem we first
want to talk about the actors of our
system who is involved and uh in this
case all users are kind of on equal
footing uh we have uh anybody can send
messages between peers on our Network we
don't really have any privileged actors
if we were designing Uber we have
writers and drivers if we were designing
YouTube we have creators and viewers but
for WhatsApp all users are peers and so
we can leave it at that once I've got
the actors I can work through my
functional requirements and make sure
that I've got nouns that reflect all of
the things that I need to do so the
first thing that I need to do is set up
a chat and inside my chat I can send and
receive
messages now when I want to access
messages after I've been offline I think
it's important to recognize that a
person isn't offline a device is offline
I turned off my phone and now it's back
on but my laptop's been on the entire
time and so I need an entity to reflect
my clients or maybe my devices so that
way I can keep track of where have
message has been delivered I want to
know that all of the messages have been
delivered to my phone and my laptop
eventually I've got a pretty good set of
entities here that cover my functional
requirements so I'm going to keep moving
I'm not going to spend additional time
here but I've given some good discussion
that tells my interviewer I'm thinking
deeply about the nouns and the entities
in my problem our next step in the
delivery framework is for us to talk
about our API or system interface and
before we go there we need to First
think about how we actually make
connections between our app and the
backend servers
on our website on hello interview we
have some premium content one of those
deep Dives as part of the premium
content is our real-time updates Deep
dive where we talk a lot about
connectivity and the various options for
making connections between clients and
and servers and you've got a lot of
options here uh you can use long polling
ssse we can use websockets or web RTC
one of the ways that we talk about how
you can kind of Reason through whether
you're going to need to use one of these
Technologies is based on a whether you
are very latency sensitive if not you
should definitely use polling in this
case we need to deliver all our messages
in 500 milliseconds so that doesn't
apply the next thing is whether There Is
frequent biral communication uh between
the client and the server in this case
yeah messages can be coming back and
forth uh for our chat app quite
frequently so we can't use ssse in this
case because we also need to be able to
send messages quite rapidly the last
consideration for us is whether we have
peer-to-peer or need audio and video
support we don't actually need that for
WhatsApp with the requirements that
we're given so the natural conclusion
for us here is to use websockets I think
in WhatsApp uh the the real app they're
just using a simple TLS connection
they're not using the overhead of
websockets but the same principle
applies here we need a persistent
connection between the client and the
server that we can Ferry messages back
and forth so a restful API for WhatsApp
probably doesn't make as much sense
because it doesn't give us a way for us
to send those messages back uh from
server to client so now that we know
that we're going to be using websockets
for the connection between client and
server we can talk about what our API
looks like and this isn't going to be a
tradition restful API there really is no
standard for describing a websocket API
but I think an easy way to talk about
this is commands that are being sent
from the client to the server as well as
commands that are going to be received
uh by the uh client from the the server
in terms of commands that are going to
be sent well we can go back to our
functional requirements to reason
through this first of all we need a way
to create a
chat we also need a way way to send a
message we may need a way to create an
attachment we'll think about this as we
go into our actual design how this might
work and then we might need a way to
modify the participants that are
existing in a chat maybe to add a user
or remove a user we could clearly think
of lots of other functionalities but
we're going to stop here to make sure
that we cover our functional
requirements in terms of commands that
are going to be received well we need to
get a notification to our client
Whenever there is a new message we we
need to be able to send and receive
messages we also need to get updates
when new chats are created that I'm um
added to or maybe when participants
change so that way I'll know that you
know Sandra is no longer part of the
group chat uh you know maybe she's on
the outs uh with our our social group
now I can obviously go into detail about
the body and content of each of these
but I'm not going to do that here in
part because the rest of the design is
going to take a lot of time so what I'm
going to do is I'm going to tell my
interviewer hey I think this is the
rough scaffolding but I'm going to come
back to this as I get more clarity on
the details it's very common in system
design interviews to be somewhat
iterative and especially for the API and
highle design there usually is a bit of
a back and forth and most interviewers
understand that this is what what's
going on so my recommendation is that
you tell them hey this is just the the
start and I'm going to come back to this
as we have time you may not have time
but at least they recognize that you
know that this is a not not a complete
description the trick is you don't want
to leave your interviewer in a Lurch so
what you don't want to do is make an
obvious mistake or do something that
looks Incorrect and then make it seem as
though you don't know that you've made a
mistake what happens then is your
interviewer stews on that they might
make a note in their um interview notes
and the base assumption is that you
missed that even if you had it in the
back of your head so communicating
proactively about where you're going to
stop short or where you're making an
obvious mistake is really important to
making sure that you land that
interview now that we've got our API we
can move on to the next step we don't
have a data flow requirement here this
isn't a particularly um data heavy infra
system so we can move straight into
everyone's favorite the highle design
I've actually moved the functional
requirements up here so that we can
refer to them for the highle design our
recommendation is that you actually work
through your functional requirements and
try to satisfy them as simply as
possible now it can be tempting to try
to jump ahead and build a highly
optimized scalable system out of the
gate we don't recommend that you do do
that for certain candidates who are very
experienced go ahead skip a step if
you've got a staff level interview and
you don't want to go through all of the
basics I think that's completely
acceptable but for most candidates it
can actually be useful for you to build
the basic system and then progressively
and organically evolve why well two
reasons one this is how systems are
actually designed in the real world
people aren't just jumping to Optimal
system they're organically evolving them
over time and secondly it's very easy if
you try to jump to optimality to both
leave gaps and holes but also to have
instances where you kind of lose track
of where you are and what you needed to
do if I'm getting lost in some scaling
consideration I may not build out all of
my functional requirements and the
system isn't working it's hard for my
interviewer to give me credit in those
instances so get really good at banging
out a system that satisfies the base
functional requirements and then layer
on some of the scalability and
non-functional aspects of the system so
with that in mind let's go ahead and
start with our first functional
requirement to be able to start group
chats for this I'm obviously going to
need a client and that client is going
to make a connection to a chat server
I'm going to assume that this is a
single node chat server I just have one
instance and that's going to simplify
things dramatically and then create
problems that I'm going to go ahead and
solve later that chat server needs to
communicate with a database I will go
ahead and use Dynamo DB here but we
could realistically use any key value
store we could also use a relational
database I think a lot of people get
hung up on relational databases thinking
they don't scale I think Shopify just
released some of their numbers for Black
Friday saying there my SQL instance was
doing some number of millions of
transaction per second the idea that
relational databases somehow can't
satisfy these high scale situations is
is just simply not true although some
interviewers might mistakenly perceive
that to be the case in which case you
know go ahead and try to adapt for you
know in some cases their their ignorance
or or out ofd ideas about what's
possible in this case we'll go ahead and
use Dynamo DB so our clients are going
to make websocket connections to our
chat server and our chat server is going
to connect to our database then our
client can send that create chat message
to the chat server and then the chat
server can create a record in our
database well what tables do we need in
our database well first of all we need a
chat table uh that's going to be really
important for us to be able to store
metadata about the chat maybe we have
the ID uh the name of the chat
potentially some additional metadata
that we might need and then we we also
want to know who is in the chat so we'll
include a chat participant table and
that will have a foreign key or a
reference to the uh chat ID as well as a
participant ID now the interesting thing
about this is that when we create a chat
we typically want to do two things one
is we want to be able to find all of the
participants in a given chat and then
the next thing is we want to be able to
find all the chats in which we are
participant so for the first style of
query we can go ahead and use a
composite primary key on this chat ID
that basically allows us to look up all
of the participants given a chat ID we
can uh use the participant ID as a sort
key for the latter query where we want
to find all of the chats that I'm a
participant on we can use a global
secondary index or GSI and basically
this is a functionality in Dynamo that
allows us to create an index which
enables these rapid lookups without
having to organize our data in a
specific way and so with that Global
secondary index we'll be able to query
all of the chats that I'm a participant
of and that gives me a basic system that
allows me to start group chats now that
we've got our chat set up we can start
to think about how to send and receive
messages this is a little bit easier in
this degenerate case where we have a
single chat server I'll tell you why all
of our clients are connecting to the
chat server via websockets so we might
have a thousand connections for clients
to the chat server when we want to send
a message the client will send a send
message request to the chat server with
the chat ID that it wants to send it to
the chat server will then query the chat
participant table to go and find all of
the participant IDs that it needs to
send that message on on to now we need
to go and send those messages back to
the client how can we do that well the
nice thing is this this chat server
maintains connection for all of the
clients that are currently connected so
what we would do is we would have a
simple hash table and it would say
client a is connected to websocket one
and client B is connected to websocket
2 and now once we have all of the
participant IDs we look up the the
client ID in that hashmap and then we
find the associated websocket connection
and we send that new message command
back to the client so that they can
receive it so in this case we don't have
durability the messages aren't stored
anywhere we can only send and receive
messages to people that are currently
connected to the chat server but being
able to have kind of a live chat room is
fairly straightforward and the messages
get sent we look up the participants
based on the participants we find the
associated websocket connections and we
send them back to the client now that I
can send in receive messages let's talk
about how I can send and receive media
the idea here is pretty simple I have a
baby picture or a video of my kids and I
want to send it to Grandma and the rest
of the family how can I do that well the
most naive thing that we could probably
do here is we could create an
attachments table in Dynamo DB and then
what we could do is when users want to
send those videos they could send a
message in that existing websocket
channel to our chat server which can
then write that data to our attachments
table in Dynamo DB then when we need to
receive those messages we would load all
that data and send it back to the client
this is broken for two reasons the first
reason is that Dynamo really isn't
intended for large blob storage
especially if you're talking about
videos which could be hundreds of of
megabytes this is really not a good use
case for Dynamo TB and the second thing
is we're using our already exhausted
chat servers for this very intensive
high bandwidth use case of uploading
media if you can imagine we've got this
disparity between these gigabyte
payloads that are happening when I
upload the video of my kids for Grandma
and then the OMW messages that I'm
sending to other users to let them know
I'm on my way to the movie theater and
that disparity is usually a sign that
something is wrong so a lot of
candidates will rightfully reach to a
blob storage here since we're already
using AWS why don't we go ahead and use
S3 instead of having this attachments
data what we can do is have our chat
server write those binary blobs to blob
storage and we solved half the problem
here S3 is made for multi-gigabyte
payloads it has all the guarantees that
we need in terms of availability and
then in terms of throughput we should be
able to store things here but the
problem remains that we are still
passing a lot of data through our chat
server that really doesn't map to the
very small messages sent rapidly that we
previously had been using the chat
server for so a simple solution for this
is for us to use pre-signed URL so you
might have heard these in some of our
other designs and the idea is pretty
straightforward when our client want to
make an upload it's going to make a
request to the chat server to say give
me an upload Target or an upload URL the
chat server is going to use its
authentication to go and ask S3 for an
pre-signed URL which is basically a URL
that has embedded authentication usually
with a TTL so it'll say you can upload
to this URL in the next hour the client
will then make a direct request to that
blob storage and then upload load the
media and then it will have a URL that's
addressable inside that blob storage uh
that it can then send inside the message
that it was already sending so now
instead of sending hey here is a message
that includes the entire video I'm going
to send a message to that chat ID that
includes the URL to the payload that
I've already updated finally when users
need to receive the message they're
going to receive that URL and they're
going to make a request back to that
blob storage to go and grab that payload
uh and send it onto their client now
there are some additional problems here
we need to be able to expire this media
after it's been sent to all of its
recipient maybe we only keep it around
for 30 days uh we want to manage the
storage space so that users aren't
unnecessarily uploading data to our S3
bucket so they're not using us like a
Google Drive uh but generally speaking
this pre-signed URL regime is going to
work quite well for our purposes and it
allows us to reuse the existing
messaging infrastructure that we set up
for our SE second uh functional
requirement all right we're moving
quickly here and uh we're on to our
fourth functional requirement this is
where things are going to start to get a
little bit more complicated because up
until this point we've been assuming
that our transient connections to the
chat server were sufficient for
delivering messages but if I want to
access messages after I've been offline
then I don't have that connection to the
chat server that I can use to send those
messages so we're going to need to
evolve this solution a bit so let's go
ahead and give ourselves some space
first of all I need to be able to store
my messages so I'm going to need a
messages table let's just assume that
messages have an ID they' got some
contents maybe they have a Creator ID or
a sender ID and then a Tim stamp we'll
assume the chat server is the one
responsible for the timestamp so we can
keep it reasonably consistent so now
we've got the messages stored on our
server but how do we assume or how do we
ensure that they actually get to the end
user well one way to solve this is for
us to create a separate inbox table and
we'll have a recipient ID and we'll have
a message ID and the idea here is when
messages need to be sent we'll create an
entry in the inbox for all of the
recipients so what would the flow look
like here well first of all when we want
to send a message a client goes to the
chat server and says send message to a
given chat ID here's the contents the
chat server is going to go and look up
the chat participants so that way it
knows who to send a message to so it's
going to make a query to the uh GSI for
this table actually I don't think it
needs to use the GSI it can use the
primary key then we're going to create a
transaction to write to the messages and
inbox channel so the messages uh table
will have one record which is the
message contents and its Tim stamp and
then the inbox table we will create
records for every participant in that
chat now note that Dynamo DB
transactions support up to 100 records
so we need to make sure that our group
chats are no larger than 100
participants so we can make this
transaction I guess 99 once we've
created the recipients now we can try to
go and send messages to our clients in
the chat server we maintain the map of
the client IDs to the currently
connected webs sockets and then for each
participant where we can address them
we're going to go ahead and send the
message to that client now we want to
keep track of delivery we want to make
sure that those messages actually got to
the client so a natural thing for us to
do is when the client receives a message
it's going to send an act or an
acknowledgement back to the chat server
so when it receives a certain message ID
the chat server is going to receive the
app and then at that point the chat
server delete that entry from the inbox
so that way we don't need to send it
again now when clients connect to the
chat server for the first time the chat
server can then unload all of the
messages in the inbox that the client
hasn't received we will go and look up
all of the message IDs for that
recipient ID and then for those message
IDs we'll grab their content and we will
send messages to the client which will
will then act each of those messages and
remove them from the inbox so what we're
guaranteeing here is that messages will
be eventually delivered to clients that
clients as long as they are periodically
connecting to the chat server will
receive those messages and if they are
already online on the chat server
they've got a websocket connection then
we'll already be able to send the
message over that pre-existing
Channel all right so we finally got a
design that satisfies follow of our
functional requirements but it does so
in a degenerate way and we're going to
be reminding our interviewer throughout
this process that we understand that
this design doesn't scale that we know
about the problems because we don't want
them to jump to the conclusion that hey
this guy doesn't understand or this gal
doesn't understand scaling the next step
for us is to jump into our deep Dives
and this is the place where we're going
to start to satisfy our non-functional
requirements deal with any questions
that our interviewer might add on to the
list they might throw additional
requirements and then constantly look
for places where we can refine our
design uh this is kind of an iterative
process where we're looking for issues
resolving those issues and then moving
forward so I'm going to go ahead and
delete our framework to leave space for
our non-functional requirements which
I'll drop on the screen now now despite
being a degenerate solution we're
actually not off to a terrible start so
first of all this non-functional
requirement of delivering with low
latency is already satisfied ified when
clients are connecting to our chat
server they're going to send messages
we'll write those messages to the
database but since we already have all
the websocket connections we can deliver
those messages immediately for anybody
who's currently connected so that one is
satisfied we can also guarantee delivery
of messages because we're writing them
on the server side to our database so we
write the messages to this uh messages
table into the inbox clients are going
to get those messages if they're
connected and if they're not not then
when they connect again to our server we
can go and find all the messages that
haven't been delivered and deliver them
great but the next requirement is really
going to throw us for a loop in terms of
billions of users we're probably not
going to satisfy those with a single
chat server and we really wouldn't want
to because of the availability problems
WhatsApp famously served 2 million users
per server 2 million connections per
server which is actually pretty high and
they're right to be proud of that I I
think you could probably get those
numbers even higher on Modern Hardware
but still as an order of magnitude we're
going to have to have hundreds if not
maybe a thousand chat servers in order
to support the operations that we have
here so to get to a th000 chat servers
we're going to have to make some changes
me rearrange this diagram a
bit so first visually let's include some
additional chat servers when the clients
are trying to connect to our chat
servers they need to know which one to
go to the natural thing to do here is
insert a load
balancer but we'll note that the load
balancer here needs to be a little bit
different with a web server our web
servers are stateless and what that
means is that the load balancer can
basically terminate requests at the at
the layer seven at the HTTP level and
then forward those requests to an
arbitrary server so if I get an HTTP
request to a layer 7 load balancer I can
forward that HTTP request to any of my
stateless web servers get the response
and return it back to my client it
doesn't need to go to a specific server
but with websockets it's a connection
oriented protocol and so I need to
retain the connection between client and
server and as such I need a different
style of load balancer this this is
known as a layer 4 load balancer and the
way that it works is when a client
connects to the load balancer it creates
a TCP connection it's going to go and
send messages over that TCP connection
and the load balancer is going to create
a symmetric connection to my chat
servers so whenever the client creates a
new connection a new connection is
created and when the client disconnects
the load balancer also disconnects and
what this is going to do is effectively
it's going to make this load balancer
invisible to my chat servers it's as if
the client was connecting directly to a
chat server now the load balancer can
decide which connections are made to
which servers and the most natural way
to do this for this setup is to use the
lease
connections so when the client connects
to the load balancer it's going to
choose the chat server that currently
has the least open connections the load
balancer knows how many connections it's
already made and it's going to choose
the one with the least and the reason
this is useful is because the chat
server's primary resource the thing that
it's consuming is that connection now we
can go up to 2 million connections but
probably not larger and what this allows
us to do is when we scale we add new
chat servers into the rotation those
will be saturated quickly because the
load balancer will recognize that this
new server has zero or one connections
whereas my other chat server has
millions I'm going to start to Route
inbound connections to that chat server
until it's approximately equal with
others Now setting it up like this does
give us that horizontal scalability but
it doesn't actually solve our problem in
fact it makes this first requirement
break let's talk a little bit about what
that looks like so the client connects
to the load balancer to the chat server
they want to send a message they send a
message uh they are user a and they want
to send a message to user B so normally
what we do is the chat server looks up
all the participants it would find user
b as the participant in whatever chat
that we were talking about it would
write the message into the messages and
inbox and then it would look at its
local websocket connections and try to
pass the message back down via the
websocket that the other user is
connected through but we have a problem
here user a might be connected to chat
server one and user B might be connected
to chat server 2 so so user a isn't able
to send that message to the websocket
that user B is connected through because
they're connected to completely
different servers so fundamentally we
have a routing problem here we need our
chat servers to be able to talk to one
another to pass messages so that they
eventually arrive at the clients that we
care about like all good system design
problems there are a bunch of ways that
we can potentially solve this the thing
that I think a lot of candidates grab
gravitate toward is to try to use kofka
here and the idea would be we're going
to set up C kofka topics for each user
when clients connect to a chat server
we're going to subscribe to the topic
for that user and then when we want to
send a message to a user we'll write to
the kofka topic for that user and so the
idea would be if I need to send a
message to a chat I'll look up all the
participants I'll write to those kofka
topics and then these chat servers will
be reading from those topics and they
will grab the message and then send it
to the associated websocket connection
back to the client now unfortunately
this isn't a very good solution in part
because kofka really isn't architected
for billions of topics another problem
is that kofka topics are really heavy
they're somewhere between 50 and 100
kilobytes per topic which when we talk
about billions of users is terabytes of
data just to get the setup for both the
part partitions and the topics finally
kovat doesn't really support this rapid
connect and disconnect for many topics
it's not built for these very shortlived
small topics micro topics that we're
trying to set up here so ultimately kfka
probably not the best solution a better
option for us is to use a consistent
hash ring and the idea here is if we can
predictably know that a specific user is
always going to be owned or connected to
a specific server then whenever we need
to send messages to that user we can
just send them to that server and know
that it can pass them along so how might
this work well first of all we'll dump
our load balancer and expose our chat
servers to the web via DNS that way
clients can connect directly to a chat
server but they may not know which chat
server to connect to so let's go
introduce a chat registry and the idea
with this chat registry is it's just a
way for clients to find out which chat
server they need to connect to and then
finally we're going to need some way to
store our configuration we can use
zookeeper or uh
ETD but any storage that we can sync of
between all of the nodes uh in our
cluster so that they can be aware of
where a particular user is
assigned and so the steps now to send a
message when a client first wants to
connect they're going to go to the chat
registry and say I'm user a uh tell me
which server and the chat registry might
say you're connected to server one now
when they want to send a message to user
B they're going to write their message
to server one which they're connected to
they're going to do the same set of
processes to write their message and
create it in the Inbox and now that they
know that they want to send a message to
user B they're going to use the
information that's in Zookeeper to find
out which chat server user B might be
connected to and then make a direct
connection the chat servers are going to
write to one another so uh server one is
going to write to if B is assigned the
server to a message that says I've got a
new message for user B and and then
server 2 is going to check its internal
hashmap to see if user B is indeed
connected uh to the server and if it is
it's going to pass that message through
so we've got two hops instead of just
going through that singular server now
this isn't without its problems the the
biggest issue with this consistent hash
approach is scaling becomes a bit of a
an orchestration so imagine we have four
servers and we want to move to five
the consistent hashing approach is going
to guarantee that most of those users
are going to stay on their existing host
but some of the users on the edge about
20% are going to get moved to a
different host the way that that
typically happens is we signal into
zookeeper or into etcd that this event
is happening and then chat servers are
going to slowly disconnect the users who
are misassigned if user a is connected
to server one and it needs to moveed to
two we'll disconnect them the client
will reconnect via the registry and then
they'll be connected to server two we
need to do this slowly so that a lot of
connections and disconnections aren't
happening
simultaneously and while this scaling
event is happening when we want to send
a message to user B who might be on
server two or might be on server three
depending upon where we're at in the
process we may need to send messages to
both of the servers so that that we can
eventually get that message to user B
which is both additional overhead and
stress on our service but also this
additional orchestration that we need to
run now your interviewer may or may not
require you to go into that detail but
it's important to understand what is
actually happening during scaling events
for a consistently hash Service uh in
order to make this work now while the
consistent hash approach is good it does
force us to contend with this
orchestration problem for scaling and
there is potential that chat servers
might get hot that the connections on
one chat server uh might be more than on
other chat servers we basically have
uneven load so the idea behind the kofka
instance where we had kind of
externalized that inter server
communication was good in spite of the
fact that from a technical perspective
kofka is probably not the right
technology to imp mement this so can we
get a bit of both well yes I I think we
can and the solution here that I think
is a pretty good one is to use redis
pubsub the way that redis pubsub works
is you tell redus I would like to listen
to a particular topic which is a string
uh redis creates an internal hashmap
much like our chat servers do and then
when you publish messages to that topic
um reddis will look up in that hashmap
which sockets are listening on that
topic and then pass them the message it
is a very dumb uh socket server in some
sense and the guarantees of reddis
pubsub are pretty low what redis pubsub
offers is at most once delivery of
messages which is to say I might deliver
it or I might not um that would normally
be pretty bad except for the fact that
we do already have ways to guarantee the
delivery of our messages remember that
we're writing them to our durable
storage when clients connect they're
able to retrieve any messages that
haven't been received yet we can even
have our clients periodically PLL or
receive some other notification that
there might be messages that are waiting
for them and that they need to go and
get them so we have a way to deliver
those messages in a reliable way redis
pubsub gives us a really lightweight way
of having the real time or under 500 MC
delivery of messages so what does that
look like well when our users connect to
a chat server they can connect to anyone
will use the leas connections that chat
server will register a subscription to
redis pubsub for that particular user ID
and then when we send a message and we
get to that point where we we want to go
and notify all of the connected users
that a message is waiting the chat
servers will then publish a notification
to that topic given the user ID and
reddis will pass that over to the server
that's responsible for that user ID and
then that server will pass that over the
web socket that's also associated with
that particular user ID so fundamentally
we have a way of bouncing through redus
to get to the right server
and get the messages uh to the right
client now this isn't Panacea and
fundamentally we have many of the same
problems that we had with the consistent
hashing approach in that if for some
reason we need to scale the reddis
cluster then we have to go through the
same orchestration problem of moving
topics and moving
connections you have to understand for
redis what we basically have is the
topics are going to be spread amongst
nodes in the cluster and so each chat
server is going to need to maintain a
connection to each of the nodes of the
redus cluster now fortunately this redus
cluster isn't doing much it it really
doesn't have much responsibility aside
from basically echoing requests across
sockets and so we don't need a giant
cluster to be able to support the
throughput that we have but we are going
to require an n * m number of
connections here which if the system
were to scale to trillions of of
accounts might become a problem for us
so now that we've satisfied billions of
users we've got one more requirement of
messages not being stored
unnecessarily this gives us a bit of
time the idea for WhatsApp is that after
30 days uh if you haven't received your
message you aren't going to get it and
uh like I mentioned in the beginning we
don't want to keep messages around that
we don't need to they end up being a
privacy liability which for meta is
incredibly important and very expensive
when they get wrong so what we can do is
add a cleanup service which is going to
do this work our messages table remember
has a timestamp so if we add a secondary
index on that Tim stamp we can go find
all the messages that are older than 30
days and we can delete them the inbox
remember is going to have a record for
every undelivered message and it's going
to be deleted as soon as the clients
receive it if we add an addition
timestamp field here then we can use the
same sort of cleanup
process when messages are received by
all clients we may also want to delete
the message here so when we are about to
go and delete from the inbox we can
check to see if that is the last message
in the Inbox and if so we can remove the
message there may be some race
conditions here but remember we've got
these guard rails of 30 days so even if
we might miss a message we're not going
to miss miss it for long uh it's going
to disappear now this gives us a chance
to really estimate the storage
requirement of the system and if we
assume we've got a billion users and
they do 100 messages per
day then we're going to have a 100
billion messages per
day if each of those messages is capped
let's just assume that the contents can
be no long no larger than a kilobyte
then we're going to have a kilobyte per
message so we have 100 billion kilobytes
or 100 trillion
bytes and if you recall Mega is a
million Giga is a billion Terra is
trillion so this is uh 100
terabytes that's per day and we'd
multiply that by 30 days if we assume
that all message me we're going to wait
indefinitely but the reality is most
messages are going to get delivered
immediately and get removed by our other
process so our database is going to need
on the order of a few hundred terabytes
this is a lot of of data but not a a
unheard of amount and certainly
achievable by modern systems our
interviewer might ask us a few
extensions to this problem so one
extension would be be to allow users to
have multiple devices how does our
design need to
change now all of our tables currently
are keyed off the idea that the
recipient is a user ID that basically a
user would get one message there's kind
of a onetoone
relationship but if they might have
multiple devices then we're going to
need to add a new notion and what we can
do is add a
client with a user ID and then maybe a
client ID now we need to go and update
our design such that everything we are
referring to a user we need to refer to
the client so our inbox for instance
would have a recipient client ID and our
Pub subtopics would now be
clients now when a client wants to send
a message they're going to look up all
of the participants and then for each
participant we're going to look up all
of their clients and then send messages
to each of them now this would greatly
increase the number of rows that you
would need to insert into the inbox
table in the instance where for instance
you've got a hundred people and they've
got five devices each so we would
probably want to put some limits on the
number of active clients that a user
could have maybe they can have two or
three devices and then we would need to
go and percolate that restriction
through to the group size to make sure
that we're not running a foul of that
Dynamo DB transaction limit where we can
only insert a 100 records at a time a
final extension that you might get asked
is about presence indicators or whether
someone is available and the idea for
this is you open up your app and you see
your contact list and you'd like to see
little green orbs next to those people
who are online and then maybe no orb or
a Red Orb for those people who aren't
this requires some product design we
really need to specify the requirements
of the feature because we need to know
which users care about the presence of
other users you could do this in a very
simple polling fashion by keeping a
table which has whether a user is
connected or not and then querying that
that table whenever you want to see
whether that user is currently active
and so what this would look like is when
a connection is established to the chat
server it would write to a new table
maybe this is
available user ID and status and then
when a connection happened it would
write a status of available and then
when you disconnected when the websocket
connection was terminated then that
status would be set to unavailable now
in a lot of cases people want to get
notifications about when that's
happening if you had the screen open
you'd want to see things that are
changing and we would probably use the
existing Pub sub infrastructure for this
so we would need some way for users to
indicate their interest in the
availability of a particular user they
would have to subscribe to that somehow
and then whenever those disconnect
events happened we would publish to that
topic and then pass those events down to
the clients that are concerned with it a
big challenge here is deciding which
users I care about watching because
there's obviously some immense fan out
that could happen here what we probably
don't want is when a user to get
disconnected for us to have to send out
thousands or tens of thousands of
notifications so we need to figure out
how we can constrain the number of users
who can be watching a particular user at
a certain time but those would be the
types of things that you might go into
uh with additional time in this
interview okay so we touched on a lot of
information in this problem you might be
asking yourself all right how much of
this do I actually need to know for an
interview and this of course is going to
vary depending upon how grumpy your
interviewer is and the companies that
you're you're interviewing for but
generally speaking for midlevel
candidates the expectation is that
you're relatively new to system design
and so we we touch on things like webs
socket management consistent hashing and
Pub sub database design the expectation
is that you're not going to be
particularly deep in any of these areas
now you should be roughly familiar and
being able to call out various uh
challenges that you're going to run into
is definitely a bonus but the
interviewer is not expecting you to come
up with a perfect design out of the gate
for more senior candidates they are
expecting you are going to be familiar
with all of these Core Concepts that you
have an idea about how load balance ERS
work and how websockets work and you
have an idea about how consistent
hashing might enable scaling of stateful
services you are going to make mistakes
everybody does your interviewer isn't
expecting any specialist knowledge but
they're going to expect that you do a
pretty good job in putting together a
system that scales and satisfies the
requirements for a staff level candidate
you're going to really zoom in on the
interesting parts of this problem so
your interviewer wants to see that you
really understand that the statefulness
of these chat servers is pretty
interesting and that the data model is
in service of really rapid querying and
then also very fast rights to be able to
support the throughput that we're
talking about and so what they want to
see from you is that you're able to zoom
in on the hard or important parts of the
problem and then generalize your
knowledge and your experience to be able
to come up with solutions that are going
to work for a particular instance it's
not the case that staff level candidates
are like senior candidates but just even
better they're going to focus on
qualitatively different pieces but
they're also going to be able to bring
in a much larger toolkit of approaches
and experience that their interviewer is
going to be able to see Managers
generally speaking are usually held to
about a senior level uh of standard
across most companies there are some
exceptions to this where managers are
held to a staff level uh standard uh but
they are very much the exception rather
than the rule that's usually not the
case anyway I hope that this breakdown
was useful for you um we have the
writeup available on our website so if
you've got questions feel free to
comment below or comment on our guide
which walks into some of these things in
Greater detail and then highly encourage
if you've got questions around ssse or
websockets or about consistent hashing
to read up on their realtime updates
Deep dive which goes into a lot more
detail and spells out some of these
Concepts um so that you're able to use
them in an interview thanks for spending
time with us uh love your your likes and
subscription uh if you found value here
and otherwise until next time I'll talk
to you later